# Measuring of shared music schemas: bringing together the structural and lifestyles analysis through networks of correlated music genres

Research into the meaning of cultural classifications has usually distinguished
between cultural schemes--discourses--and taste groups . Cultural schemes
classifies cultural expressions according to the meaning individuals attribute
to them and have favoured structural analysis conducted with Geometric Data
Analysis methods. Taste groups, instead have been approached as descriptions of
groups of individuals’ taste patterns combining the cultural schemes found in
the structural analysis through clustering methods (van Eijck & Lievens 2008).
In the former case we classify cultural expressions, in the latter, individuals.
But the structural analysis implicitly supposes that all individuals share the
the same schemas of cultural classification, and the clustering, loses the
shared cultural schemes.

But whether all individuals share the same schemas of cultural classification is
an empirical matter and its interpretation, a theoretical one. May be the
seminal work of  Bourdieu (1984) is  one of fey work that implicitly
acknowledges the existence of heterogeneous cultural schemes, that we calls
habitus,  but he is only interested in the homology between the spaces of
cultural practices and preferences and the social space. This means that he was
not interested in whether young individuals and middle age individuals differ in
the way they classify cultural expressions, holding constant their social
classes.

One way of overcoming this limitation is applying a new family of methods called
Relational Class Analysis (Goldberg 2011). RCA aims at measuring and revealing
shared cultural schemes. However, instead of using Goldberg’s measure of
relationality to quantify how much two individuals share a cultural schema, we
use Pearson’s correlations between individuals music tastes to form a matrix for
a valued network, where the nodes are respondents and ties between them are
their pairwise correlations. (We used the package corclass (Boutyline 2013)
implemented in the R language and Environment for Data Analysis (R Core team
2013) Then we partition the network via Newman’s (2006) eigenvector-based
modularity maximization algorithm, which assigns individuals to groups so that
Pearson’s correlation are high within groups and lower between them. 

The data for our study came from a Spanish survey on habits and cultural
practices for 2006-2007 (see Ministry of Culture (2007) for technical details).
Individuals interviewed were asked about the kind of music they normally listen
to. They were offered 21 music genres to choose from.  The survey also recorded
the educational level, occupation, age, gender, personal situation, and
city-size. 

The findings….

References

Van Eijck, K., & Lievens, J. (2008). Cultural omnivorousness as a combination of
highbrow, pop, and folk elements: The relation between taste patterns and
attitudes concerning social integration. Poetics, 36(2-3), 217–242.
doi:10.1016/j.poetic.2008.02.002

Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste.
Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.

Boutyline, A. (2013). corclass: Correlational Class Analysis. Retrieved from
http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=corclass

R Core Team. (2014). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Retrieved from
http://www.R-project.org/

Goldberg, A. (2011). Mapping shared understandings using relational class
analysis: the case of the cultural omnivore reexamined1. American Journal of
Sociology, 116(5), 1397–1436.

Newman, M. E. J. (2006). Finding community structure in networks using the
eigenvectors of matrices. Physical Review E, 74(3).
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.74.036104
